documenting application structure (#81)
margo/specification: system-design/margo-overview/software-composition.md

Reviewer: This is a general comment on this diagram. Depending on what options we support within an official version of Margo this description might need to be expanded.

See the following issues that have not been resolved yet: 
https://github.com/margo/specification/issues/67
https://github.com/margo/specification/issues/56

Reviewer 2: OK, but maybe this is something to be done in the future, as it requires much mre discussion on the referenced issues, right? @ajcraig 

Can we resolve this to go further?

Reviewer: Yes, this shouldn't stop this PR. These issues will be created as Features in our backlog and will tackle those at a later time.

    UpdateElementStyle(appd, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="blue", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(apdb, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="green", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(apdd, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="green", $borderColor="grey")
```

In this stage the [providers][provider-model] are responsible for managing the individual [Workloads][workload].

On a Helm v3 [Deployment Profiles][deployment-profile], a [Workload Fleet Management Agent][wfma] implementation could utilize the Helm API to start the individual Helm Charts.

On a Compose [Deployment Profiles][deployment-profile], a [Workload Fleet Management Agent][wfma] implementation could utilize the Compose CLI to start the individual [Workloads][workload].

The following diagram shows the result of reaching the desired state for an [Application][application] with a Helm v3 [Deployment Profile][deployment-profile] (the result of `helm install`).

```mermaid
C4Component
    title Application Deployment: Helm v3 deployment profile

    UpdateLayoutConfig($c4BoundaryInRow="3", $c4ShapeInRow="1")

    System_Boundary(dev1, "Device 1") {
        System_Boundary(woa1, "Workload Fleet Management Agent") {

>             Component(atb1, "Application Description 1", "ApplicationDescription", "YAML document")

Author: As mentioned by @phil-abb in [this comment](https://github.com/margo/specification/pull/81#discussion_r2080016984), this should be Application Deployment and not Application Description.

Author: @phil-abb could you please check if now it's correct and resolve this conversation, if so? Thanks!

        }

        System_Boundary(hel1, "Helm") {
            Component(hc1, "Helm Chart 1")
            Component(hc2, "Helm Chart 2")
        }

        System_Boundary(kbl1, "Kubelet") {
            Component(pod1, "Pod 1")
            Component(pod2, "Pod 2")
            Component(pod3, "Pod 3")
        }
    }

    Rel(atb1, hc1, "refers")
    Rel(hc1, pod1, "refers")
    Rel(atb1, hc2, "refers")
    Rel(hc2, pod2, "refers")
    Rel(hc2, pod3, "refers")
    Rel(hc2, pod3, "refers")

    UpdateElementStyle(atb1, $fontColor="white", $bgColor="blue", $borderColor="grey")
```

The following diagram shows the result of reaching the desired state for an [Application][application] with a Compose [Deployment Profile][deployment-profile] (the result of the `compose up` CLI call).

```mermaid
C4Component
    title Application Deployment: Compose deployment profile

    UpdateLayoutConfig($c4BoundaryInRow="3", $c4ShapeInRow="1")

    System_Boundary(dev1, "Device 1") {
        System_Boundary(woa1, "Workload Fleet Management Agent") {

>             Component(atb1, "Application Description 1", "ApplicationDescription", "YAML document")

Author: As mentioned by @phil-abb in [this comment](https://github.com/margo/specification/pull/81#discussion_r2080016984), this should be Application Deployment and not Application Description.

Author: @phil-abb could you please check if now it's correct and resolve this conversation, if so? Thanks!

3. Compose as [Component][component]: a [Compose Archive][application-package]
4. Compose as [Workload][workload]: a so-called [Compose file](https://github.com/compose-spec/compose-spec/blob/main/spec.md#compose-file) and all the container images required by the to-be-started [services](https://github.com/compose-spec/compose-spec/blob/main/05-services.md).

## Stages

### 1. Software Packaging

```mermaid
C4Context
    title Software Packaging stage

    Enterprise_Boundary(be, "Backend") {
        System(app, "ApplicationDescription", "Application Package")
    }
    UpdateElementStyle(app, $fontColor="white", $bgColor="blue", $borderColor="grey")
```

Software at rest requires following resources:

- an [Application Description][application-description]: a Margo-specific way to distribute a composition of one or more [Component][component]
- some application resources: icon, license(s), release notes,...
- some [Component][component]: a well-specified way to distribute software supported by Margo specification (e.g. Helm Chart and container images, Compose Archive,...)

[Application Packages][application-package] and [Components][component] are managed and hosted separately:

> - [Application Registries][application-registry] store [Application Descriptions][application-description] and their associated application resources (as of now application registries SHALL be git repositories) 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Application Registries][application-registry] store [Application Descriptions][application-description] and their associated application resources. An Application Registry is implemented as a git repository.
```

- [Component Registries][component-registry] store components

The following diagram shows, at hand of an example, the relationship between an [Application Package][application-package] and tis [Components][component] listed within its [Deployment Profiles][deployment-profile]:

```mermaid
C4Component
    title Application Bundling: Example 1 - Helm and Compose deployment profiles provided

    System_Boundary(ar, "Application Registry (Git)") {
        System_Boundary(ab1, "Application Package 1") {

>             Component(atb1, "Application Package", "Reference", "Git reference? OCI manifest?")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            Component(atb1, "Application Package", "Reference", "Git reference")
```

Remove "?"

Author: Where is it defined how an application package is unambiguously identified? I couldn't find it, that's why I've left it open with the question marks.

Options I can think of:
- `my-application:vX.Y.Z` (similar to Python or NPM packages),
- `my-application:abc123xyz` (where "abc123xyz" is some kind of hash),
- `github.com/my-project/my-application:vX.Y.Z` (similar to Go packages),
- `https://github.com/my-project/my-application:abc123xyz` (a valid **Git reference**, what could be a commit ID, tag or even branch),
- `ghcr.io/my-application:vX.YZ` (a valid OCI tagged reference),
- `ghcr.io/my-application:abc123xyz` (a valid OCI digest reference)
- something else

BTW, a Git reference without the repository is worthless to find a package. I mean, I tell you that "cee3a256c36483a1b63d907c5a41f62affaff9f1" is a valid Git reference, go find that package 😄

Reviewer 3: Currently, the specification only indicates a Git repository must be used to make the application package available to the WFM, not OCI. I don't think the specification will define how the WFM gets the URL for the get repository from the customer, only that the customer will need to be able to provide it along with the credentials.

Author: OCI was just an example, like Python, Go or NPM. My point is that it's unclear to me how to "name" an application package.

Let me try to be very precise. When I'm talking about "Git references" I mean what in the Git jargon is called an [tree-ish](https://git-scm.com/docs/gitglossary#Documentation/gitglossary.txt-aiddeftree-ishatree-ishalsotreeish), [tree object](https://git-scm.com/docs/gitglossary#def_tree_object) or simply [object](https://git-scm.com/docs/gitglossary#def_object). This information is worthless without a reference to the Git repository itself.

For example:
commit `4b79fb39b6c0a21d841b65865660b1a4fb8f7cba` of the Git repository `https://github.com/margo/specification.git` or `git@github.com:margo/specification.git` (the same repo reached over two different protocols) gives the current last repo commit.
If I only get the commit ID, I won't be able to recover anything without knowing the repository.

@phil-abb are you telling me that we only specify that the repo and the treeish must be provided with the credentials, but we don't specify how?

Author: Or is it the "Application Catalog" telling the consumers which Git repo to contact and which tree-ish/reference to fetch?

In this case how are the applications unambiguously identified in the "Application Catalog"?

Author: IMO we need some discussions to refine it, but for the purpose of this PR, I'll simply remove this "artifact type" information.

Author: Fix: removed

# Software Composition

[Applications][application] can be found in completely different stages:

1. "Application Packaging": application has been prepared and made ready for deployment.
2. "Application Deployment" (AKA Runtime): application has been made available and accessible on the device.

Distinguishing which stage terminology refers to is important to understand the scope of following definitions.

> ℹ️ _Note_: Logically there is another intermediate stage: "Application Staging". This is the stage in which the application is set up, configured, and made available for use to the device, but has not yet been deployed (started) to be used. As of now this stage is out of scope in the Margo specification and not being considered, because some of the providers (like the Helm one) do not provide any mechanisms to manage it.

Reviewer 2: put link on "providers"

Author: Fix: done.

## Terminology Scoping

This section does not declare terminology, that is the task of the [Technical Lexicon](technical-lexicon.md), but rather tries to scope some of the terms to the above mentioned stages.

#### Application

The term [application][application] applies to all stages.

#### Workload

The term [Workload][workload] applies only to [running software](#2-software-deployment).

[Workloads][workload] are the result of deploying [Components][component].

#### Component

> The term [Component][component] applies to the resources available in [packaged software](#1-software-packaging) that get instantiated into [Workloads][workload].

Reviewer 2: I suggest to include the term "deploy", as components are within "deploymentProfiles". So, why not sying "...that get deployed into...".

Reviewer 3: Maybe "that get deployed as Workloads"

Author: Fix: accepted @phil-abb proposal.

> Some providers might support that multiple [Workload][workload] replicas are instantiated from a single [Component][component].

Reviewer 2: "providers": include link
"instantiated" replace with "deployed"

Reviewer 3: same here "deployed as Workloads"

Author: Fixed: accepted both proposals.

> [Components][component] are made available over [Component Catalogs][component-catalog].

Reviewer 2: We decided on "Component Registry". (see slides and meeting record from 9th of April)

Author: This is probably the answer to [this comment](https://github.com/margo/specification/pull/81#discussion_r2039712426) and many others referring to that comment... I'll fix/update it everywhere and mark the affected conversations accordingly as resolved.

Author: Fix: done

[Components][component] might have different shapes depending on their type and on which stage is being considered:

1. Helm v3 as [Component][component]: a [Helm Chart](https://helm.sh/docs/topics/charts/)
2. Helm v3 as [Workload][workload]: all container images required by the to-be-started pods.
3. Compose as [Component][component]: a [Compose Archive][compose-archive]
4. Compose as [Workload][workload]: a so-called [Compose file](https://github.com/compose-spec/compose-spec/blob/main/spec.md#compose-file) and all the container images required by the to-be-started [services](https://github.com/compose-spec/compose-spec/blob/main/05-services.md).

## Stages

### 1. Software Packaging

```mermaid
C4Context
    title Software Packaging stage

    Enterprise_Boundary(be, "Backend") {
        System(app, "ApplicationDescription", "Application Package")
    }
    UpdateElementStyle(app, $fontColor="white", $bgColor="blue", $borderColor="grey")
```

> Software at rest requires following resources:

Reviewer 2: Rephrase:
"Software at rest is made available as:"

Author: I'm not sure that "[...] is made available as [...]" conveys the fact that an application package is composed of the mentioned elements. If you don't like the current formulation, what about "[...] is composed of [...]"?

Author: Reading the other comments in this block, I think that you are directly thinking on the way the mentioned resources are structured and my intention was only to list the content, without focusing in the structure.

> Software at rest requires following resources:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Software at rest is made available as an Application Package, which is a folder with a Margo-defined structure comprising the software application. This Application Package contains:

- An [Application Description][application-description] that is a Margo-specific way to define the composition of one or more [Components][component]. These [Components][component] are linked in the Application Description document, are deployable as workloads, and are provided in a Margo-supported way, e.g. as Helm Charts or Compose Archives.
- Some application resources: icon, license(s), release notes,...
```

Author: Fix: applied

> 

Reviewer 2: - An Application Package, which is a folder with a Margo-defined structure comprising the software application.

Author: I'm not sure what you mean here. Could you please use the "Add a suggestion, <Ctrl+g>" functionality? Just in case you don't know it, it's this button 
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1f0d6952-2012-4198-aeab-cfa80d450273)

Reviewer 2: incorporated in suggestion above

> - an [Application Description][application-description]: a Margo-specific way to distribute a composition of one or more [Component][component]

Reviewer 2: - an [Application Description][application-description] is contained in the Application Package. It is a Margo-specific way to define the composition of one or more [Components][component].

Reviewer 2: see above

- some application resources: icon, license(s), release notes,...

> - some [Component][component]: a well-specified way to distribute software supported by Margo specification (e.g. Helm Chart and container images, Compose Archive,...)

Reviewer 2: Rephrase to:
- links to some [Components][component], which are deployable as workloads, and provided in a Margo-supported way, e.g. as Helm Charts or Compose Archives.

Reviewer 2: incorported in suggestion above

> [Application Descriptions][application-description], resources and [Components][component] are managed and hosted separately:

Reviewer 2: Rephrase to:
"Application Packages and Components are hosted separately:"

Author: Fix: accepted proposal.

> - [Application Registries][application-registry] store [Application Descriptions][application-description] and their associated application resources (as of now application registries SHALL be git repositories) 

Reviewer 2: - [Application Registries][application-registry] store [Application Packages][application-package], their contained [Application Description][application-description] and associated resources. The Application Registry SHALL be Git repository.

Reviewer 2: the "as of now" part is irrelevant

- [Component Registries][component-registry] store components

The following diagram shows the mentioned registries and resources (container images are not shown for simplicity):

> ```mermaid

Reviewer 2: This diagra is now confusing, as it put the UML indicator "component" on top of each "Application Description". However, inside each Application Description there are multiple deploymentProfiles, which contain/refer to components.

Author: See [this comment](https://github.com/margo/specification/pull/81#discussion_r2073117612).

        Component(cc1, "Compose Archive 1", "Component", "TARball")
        Component(cc2, "Compose Archive 2", "Component", "TARball")
    }

    Rel(atb1, hc2, "refers")
    Rel(atb1, cc1, "refers")

    Rel(atb2, hc1, "refers")
    Rel(atb1, hc3, "refers")

    Rel(atb3, hc3, "refers")
    Rel(atb3, cc1, "refers")

    Rel(atb4, cc2, "refers")

    UpdateElementStyle(atb1, $fontColor="white", $bgColor="blue", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(atb2, $fontColor="white", $bgColor="blue", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(atb3, $fontColor="white", $bgColor="blue", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(atb4, $fontColor="white", $bgColor="blue", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(hc1, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="khaki", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(hc2, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="khaki", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(hc3, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="khaki", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(cc1, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="lightsalmon", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(cc2, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="lightsalmon", $borderColor="grey")
```

> The following diagram shows the relationship between the different resources of an [Application][application] bundle and the required [Components][component] for an example application providing both Helm v3 and Compose [Deployment Profiles][deployment-profile]:

Reviewer 2: Rephrase to:

"The following diagram shows at hand of an example the relationship between an [Application Package][application-package] and its [Components][component] listed within its [Deployment Profiles][deployment-profile]:"

With this figure (and the one below), you can delete the one above.

Author: The feedback from other people also shows that there might be too many diagrams with too few differences. You are probably right, that the diagram titled "Application Bundling: applications-workload definitions relationship" provides the least valuable information and can be removed.

Fix: proposal accepted in the text and diagram removed.

                    System_Boundary(c3, "helm.v3") {
                        Component(wldh1, "Helm WorkloadArtifact 1", "Section in YAML document")
                    }
                    System_Boundary(c4, "compose") {
                        Component(wldc1, "Compose WorkloadArtifact 1", "Section in YAML document")
                    }
                }
                Rel(ad,wldh1, "defines")
                Rel(ad,wldc1, "defines")
            }

            Rel(atb1, ad, "requires")
            Rel(atb1, rd, "requires")
        }
    }

    System_Boundary(crr, "Component Catalog") {
        Component(hc1, "Helm Chart 1", "Component")
        Component(cc1, "Compose Archive 1", "Component", "TARball")
    }

    Rel(wldh1, hc1, "refers")
    Rel(wldc1, cc1, "refers")

    UpdateElementStyle(ad, $fontColor="white", $bgColor="blue", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(hc1, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="khaki", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(cc1, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="lightsalmon", $borderColor="grey")
```

The following diagram shows the top-level structure of a Compose component:

```mermaid
C4Component

>     title Application Bundling: Example 2 - focus on Component Catalog

Reviewer 2: its called "Component Registry".

Author: As mentioned in [this comment](https://github.com/margo/specification/pull/81#discussion_r2063796579), I cannot find any reference to the term "Component Registry" anywhere in the spec.

Author: Fix: done.

    UpdateLayoutConfig($c4BoundaryInRow="1", $c4ShapeInRow="3")

    System_Boundary(ar, "Application Registry (Git)") {
        System_Boundary(ab1, "Application Package 1") {

>             Component(atb1, "Application Package", "Git reference? OCI manifest?")

Reviewer 2: Can we use a different UML artifact, other than "component"? very confusing otherwise.

Remove "Git reference? OCI manifest?"

Author: Unfortunately, UML with Mermaid C4 always adds the stereotype to the box. And it [only supports a limited list of types](https://mermaid.js.org/syntax/c4.html#c4-diagrams). Which one would you prefer as an alternative?

Reviewer 2: OK, I saw that now. Well, as it is anyways a minor aspect, let's keep it like this...

            System_Boundary(c1, "Application Description") {
                Component(ad, "Application Description", "YAML document")
                System_Boundary(c2, "deploymentProfiles") {
                    System_Boundary(c4, "compose") {
                        Component(wldc1, "Compose WorkloadArtifact 1")
                    }
                }
                Rel(ad,wldc1, "defines")
            }

            Component(rd, "Resources", "Directory")

            Rel(atb1, ad, "requires")
            Rel(atb1, rd, "requires")
        }
    }

>     System_Boundary(crr, "Component Catalog") {

Reviewer 2: "Component Registry"

Author: As mentioned in [this comment](https://github.com/margo/specification/pull/81#discussion_r2063796579), I cannot find any reference to the term "Component Registry" anywhere in the spec.

Author: Fix: done.

>         Component(cc1, "Compose Configuration 1", "Compose")

Reviewer 2: Use "compose file" instead of "Compose Configuration"

Author: Fixed.

        Component(ca1, "Compose Archive 1", "Component", "TARball")
        Rel(ca1, cc1, "contains")
        UpdateRelStyle(cc1, cim1, $offsetY="50")
    }

    System_Boundary(cir, "Container Image Registry") {
        Component(cim1, "Container Image 1", "Archive")
    }

    Rel(wldc1, ca1, "refers")
    Rel(cc1, cim1, "refers")

    UpdateElementStyle(ad, $fontColor="white", $bgColor="blue", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(ca1, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="lightsalmon", $borderColor="grey")
```

The application and contained components are typically configurable with the option of providing default values.

### 2. Software Deployment

> ```mermaid

Reviewer 2: Figure seems incorrect.
I guess it should reflect something like this:

Backend --> Device
Application Description --> Application Deployment
Component --> Workload

Author: This is one of the most important diagrams in this document! So we can run a couple of iterations on it, if needed so that it conveys the right information and in an understandable way.

I do not understand what you mean with _Backend --> Device_. I don't want to show any relationship between the backend and the device in the diagram. So I guess something is not clear enough and is misleading you.

_Application Description --> Application Deployment_ is in place, you I do not understand why you are missing it.
It shows that the backend takes an "Application Description", by doing a "deployment" it obtains an "Application Deployment", which then gets synchronized with the device (therefore the "same" double arrow).

It also shows the _Component --> Workload_ relationship.
Meaning that the result of instantiating a "Component" is a "Workload" in the device.

Is is clearer now?
What was the misleading information?
Have you been looking at the diagram or directly at the Mermaid code?

Reviewer 2: I don't understand why the figure shows the "deployment" arrow to an "ApplicationDeployment" on the backend. Shouldn't this go towards the device? Why is the "ApplicationDeployment" box needed on the backend?

Author: > I don't understand why the figure shows the "deployment" arrow to an "ApplicationDeployment" on the backend. Shouldn't this go towards the device? Why is the "ApplicationDeployment" box needed on the backend?

Got it! Probably "create deployment" or "instantiation" is the right label for the arrow, I'll change it. The "ApplicationDeployment" gets created in the backend and it's then provided to the device (why whatever mean we agree upon).

Author: Fix: "deployment" arrow renamed into "instantiation".

C4Context
    title Software Deployment stage

    UpdateLayoutConfig($c4BoundaryInRow="1", $c4ShapeInRow="2")

    Enterprise_Boundary(be, "Backend") {
        System(apdb, "ApplicationDeployment", "Application Deployment specification")
        System(appb, "ApplicationDescription", "Application Package")
        System(cmp, "Component")
        Rel(appb, apdb, "deployment")
        Rel(appb, cmp, "requires")
    }

    Enterprise_Boundary(dev, "Device") {
        System(apdd, "ApplicationDeployment", "Application Deployment specification")
        System(wls, "Workload")
        Rel(apdd, wls, "configures")
    }

    BiRel(apdb, apdd, "same")
    Rel(cmp, wls, "instantiation")
    UpdateElementStyle(appb, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="blue", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(appd, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="blue", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(apdb, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="green", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(apdd, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="green", $borderColor="grey")
```

> When a device gets the instruction to run an [Application][application] (over a desired-state specified with an [`ApplicationDeployment` object][deployment-definition]), its [Workload Fleet Management Agent][wfma] interacts with the [providers][provider-model].

Reviewer 2: Move this text above figure, as introductory paragraph to section.

Author: Fix: proposal accepted.

That way all [Workloads][workload] needed for an [Application][application] should get started and the desired state should be reached.

In this stage the [providers][provider-model] are responsible for managing the individual [Workloads][workload].

> On a Helm v3 [Deployment Profiles][deployment-profile], the [Workload Fleet Management Agent][wfma] would probably instruct the Helm API to start the individual Helm Charts.

Reviewer 2: Replace "..the WFMA would probably instruct..." by: "... a WFMA implementation could utilize the ..."

Author: Fix: accepted proposal.

> On a Compose [Deployment Profiles][deployment-profile], the [Workload Fleet Management Agent][wfma] would probably instruct the Compose CLI to start the individual [Workloads][workload].

Reviewer 2: Replace "..the WFMA would probably instruct..." by: "... a WFMA implementation could utilize the ..."

Author: Fix: proposal accepted.

> The following diagram shows the result of reaching the desired state for an [Application][application] with a Helm v3 [Deployment Profiles][deployment-profile] (the result of `helm install`).

Reviewer 2: "The following diagram shows the result of reaching the desired state of an [Application][application] with a Helm v3 [Deployment Profile][deployment-profile] utiizing for example the `helm install` tool."

Author: Proposal rejected

```mermaid
C4Component
    title Application Deployment: Helm v3 deployment profile

    UpdateLayoutConfig($c4BoundaryInRow="3", $c4ShapeInRow="1")

    System_Boundary(dev1, "Device 1") {
        System_Boundary(woa1, "Workload Fleet Management Agent") {

>             Component(atb1, "Application Description 1", "ApplicationDescription", "YAML document")

Reviewer 2: Remove "Component" on top of the Application Description box.

Author: See [this comment](https://github.com/margo/specification/pull/81#discussion_r2073117612).

        }

        System_Boundary(hel1, "Helm") {
            Component(hc1, "Helm Chart 1")
            Component(hc2, "Helm Chart 2")
        }

        System_Boundary(kbl1, "Kubelet") {
            Component(pod1, "Pod 1")
            Component(pod2, "Pod 2")
            Component(pod3, "Pod 3")
        }
    }

    Rel(atb1, hc1, "refers")
    Rel(hc1, pod1, "refers")
    Rel(atb1, hc2, "refers")
    Rel(hc2, pod2, "refers")
    Rel(hc2, pod3, "refers")
    Rel(hc2, pod3, "refers")

    UpdateElementStyle(atb1, $fontColor="white", $bgColor="blue", $borderColor="grey")
```

> The following diagram shows the result of deploying an [Application][application] and the corresponding [Components][component] with a Compose [Deployment Profiles][deployment-profile] (the result of `compose up`).

Reviewer 2: "The following diagram shows the result of reaching the desired state of an [Application][application] with a Compose [Deployment Profile][deployment-profile] utiizing for example the "compose up" CLI call."

Author: Fix: proposal accepted.

```mermaid
C4Component
    title Application Deployment: Compose deployment profile

    UpdateLayoutConfig($c4BoundaryInRow="3", $c4ShapeInRow="1")

    System_Boundary(dev1, "Device 1") {
        System_Boundary(woa1, "Workload Fleet Management Agent") {

>             Component(atb1, "Application Description 1", "ApplicationDescription", "YAML document")

Reviewer 2: Remove "Component" on top of the Application Description box.

Author: See [this comment](https://github.com/margo/specification/pull/81#discussion_r2073117612).

        }

        System_Boundary(fs1, "File System") {

>             Component(cc1, "Compose Configuration 1")

Reviewer 2: Use "compose file" instead of "Compose Configuration"

Author: Fixed.

>             Component(cc2, "Compose Configuration 2")

Reviewer 2: Use "compose file" instead of "Compose Configuration"

Author: Fix: done.

# Software Composition

Applications can be found in completely different stages:

1. "Application Packaging": application has been prepared and made ready for staging.

> 2. "Application Staging": application is set up, configured, and made available for use to the device, but has not yet been deployed (started) to be used.

Reviewer 3: This concept needs to be discussed and agreed upon as a community because it has many implications. 

Concepts such as "starting" and "stopping" applications in Kubernetes don't make sense. Maybe there are features of Kubernetes I'm not aware of but if you have it installed it's running and you cannot "start" and "stop" it.

Author: You are right that K8s does not have a 1st class way to accomplish it, just because this is irrelevant in cloud-scenarios. When talking about edge though, this might become crucial. I have the feeling that @eriknordmark foresees similar use-cases to those that we know in the edge. Therefore I am convinced that we need to consider this stage, I would even say that we should also support it.

I can add some remarks to the document highlighting that K8s does not support this stage out-of-the-box. Although it can be created with different approaches:
- K8s has one way to get it done: [DaemonSets](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/daemonset/) that take care of the staging.
- Even assuming that not even Margo supports that, some use-cases will require this stage to exist and to get workarounds to accomplish it. One workaround that I can think of without Margo support is the use of "staging applications". These would be applications that do not start anything and simply take care of getting the images fetched by the edge devices. These "staging applications" would get deployed whenever needed and wait for the real application keeping the images on the device.

Reviewer 3: If we're trying to focus on preview release 1 right now, I don't think this stagging concept needs to be part of it. 

If one of Margo's goals is for suppliers to be able to use existing software on the market and not have to implement everything from scratch this is one of those decisions that could be counter to that goal.

Reviewer: I'd like to just comment on the current stages we have detailed out in the specification. 

1. Application Description - fleshes out 
2. ApplicationDeployment Definition - tailored instance 
3. Application deployment - specification instructions are orchestrated locally
4. Workload Status update - updates device client provide the Fleet manager

If we discuss a staging of the workload, to be then later orchestrated with advanced deployment methods, such as canary deployments or slow rollouts, the community hasn't decided if this is part of the margo standard or a feature within the Fleet Manager. This was discussed during the pull vs push methodology comparison. 

If the staging is something that enables a End User architect to push an update to all workloads, but requires an approval from a separate persona i.e. OT user, we were positioning the policy agent to be integrated to enable this. Although not much work/focus has been put on the policy agent so far. Maybe staging workloads for local approval is part of the policy that goes down with the deployment specification, but hasn't been discussed at length. 

@eriknordmark @cmoberg @Haishi2016 thoughts?

Author: I have completely removed (for the time being) the "staging" stage from this document. A note on the top provides further information.

> 2. "Application Provisioning": application is set up, configured, and made available for use to the device, but has not yet been deployed (started) to be used.

Reviewer 4: I feel the line between "application provisioning" and "application deployment" isn't clear. If an application is made available at "application provisioning" stage, there's no stopping of an user accessing it, hence it's already "deployed"? Or does the stage mean "application staged", meaning artifacts are downloaded but not made into services yet?

Author: You are right, "made available for use" is misleading. Probably "made available to be started" would be clearer, right?

"artifacts are downloaded but not made into services yet" is exactly what I mean. That's for me provisioning, though I could also live with "staging".

Author: After some quick research, I've confirmed that you are right. "staged" is a better term than "provisioned". I will update it in the document. Thanks for your feedback!

3. "Application Deployment" (AKA Runtime): application has been made available and accessible on the device.

Distinguishing which stage terminology refers to is important to understand the scope of following definitions.

## Terminology Scoping

#### Application

The term [application](technical-lexicon.md#application) refers to all three stages.

#### Workload

> The term [workload](technical-lexicon.md#workload) applies only to [running software](#3-software-deployment).

Reviewer 3: I like this distinction. I feel we are overcomplicating things by trying to incorporate the term "workloads" too much in the ApplicationDescription and ApplicationDeployment manifests and all the parts in between getting the software running.

If we just stick to this meaning then I don't see why we cannot just keep components and not use "workload artificates".

Author: That was in fact my original proposal in my discussions with @arne-broering 🙂 But somehow we came to the conclusion that using "workload artifact" instead of "component" would create less confusion. I am open to rename "workload artifact" into "component".

Reviewer 3: This is from the Kubernetes documentation's [workloads section](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/)

> A workload is an application running on Kubernetes. Whether your workload is a single component or several that work together, on Kubernetes you run it inside a set of [pods](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/). In Kubernetes, a Pod represents a set of running [containers](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/containers/) on your cluster.

Reviewer 2: Right now, the specification of the Application Package Definition ([concept](https://specification.margo.org/app-interoperability/application-package-definition/), [format](https://specification.margo.org/margo-api-reference/workload-api/application-package-api/application-description/)) has no reference to "workloads". While other places (e.g., the technical lexicon) are stating quite a bit about "workloads". In consequence, it feels those different parts of the specification are not well integrated and were written by different people (which is the case) with different concepts in mind. Replacing "components" with "workloads" is an attempt to re-integrate these things.

Reviewer 2: > This is from the Kubernetes documentation's [workloads section](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/)
> 
> > A workload is an application running on Kubernetes. Whether your workload is a single component or several that work together, on Kubernetes you run it inside a set of [pods](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/). In Kubernetes, a Pod represents a set of running [containers](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/containers/) on your cluster.

I was not aware that we are trying to take over Kubernetes terminology.

Reviewer 3: It's more of an example. The Kubernetes documentation has a "workloads" section similar to what we have, so maybe we can get some insights from their documentation. They talk about workloads, but I don't think they use the term in any manifests. Even though Kubernetes is just one deployment option, it may be beneficial to use similar terms in similar ways so people already familiar with the concepts expressed in Kubernetes don't have to learn different meanings for similar teams.

I'm not against changing "components" to "workloads" but I'm not convinced using the term components makes the workload concept more difficult to understand and vice versa. I'd be interested in what others think. 

If we do change it to workloads though I think it should be workloads in both the application description and application deployment files.

Reviewer 2: Kubernetes uses the following concepts an relations between them:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/18d30ff0-0443-4a5c-81ba-5e027ba07d25)

Reviewer 2: Compose uses the following relations:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5075e0d5-aafb-4f3a-9a97-c4a0427015d0)

Reviewer 2: If we want to align / fit to those 2 vocabularies, we would have to rethink all our terms a bit.

Author: Probably "Component Registry" (see [this comment](https://github.com/margo/specification/pull/81#discussion_r2063796579) is an example of this misalignment.

Reviewer 2: Naming was decided in telco on 9th of April:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7c90adb9-a0da-4718-b323-843e2f224609)

So, from my perspective, this can be closed.

The term [workload artifact](#workload-artifact) applies to the resources available in [packaged software](#1-software-packaging) and [staged software](#2-software-staging) for the workload to run.

#### Workload Artifact

ℹ️ _NOTE_: new term proposal

The term [workload artifact](#workload-artifact) applies to the resources available in [packaged software](#1-software-packaging) and [staged software](#2-software-staging) for the workload to run.

The instantiation of a workload artifact results in a [workload](#workload).

Workload artifacts might have different shapes depending on the workload type and on which stage is being considered:

1. Helm v3 as Packaged Software: a [Helm Chart](https://helm.sh/docs/topics/charts/)
2. Helm v3 as Staged software: all container images required by the to-be-started pods.

> 3. Compose as Packaged Software: a [Compose Archive](../app-interoperability/application-package-definition.md)

Reviewer 3: I think we're overcomplicating things here with trying to make this distinction. Also, see the previous comment about "stagging"

Author: I disagree. As I mention in my reply to your mentioned comment, I am convinced that that separation is very relevant in edge deployments.

I am marking this conversation resolved, but leaving the above one open, because I think the discussion should be kept in a single place.

4. Compose as Staged software: a so-called [Compose file](https://github.com/compose-spec/compose-spec/blob/main/spec.md#compose-file) and all the container images required by the to-be-started [services](https://github.com/compose-spec/compose-spec/blob/main/05-services.md).

## Stages

### 1. Software Packaging

```mermaid
C4Context
    title Software Packaging stage

    Enterprise_Boundary(be, "Backend") {
        System(app, "ApplicationDescription", "Application Package")
    }
    UpdateElementStyle(app, $fontColor="white", $bgColor="blue", $borderColor="grey")
```

Software at rest requires following resources:

- an application definition: a Margo-specific way to distribute a composition of one or more components
- some application resources: icon, license(s), release notes,...

> - some workload artifacts: a well-specified way to distribute software supported by Margo specification (e.g. Helm Chart and container images, Compose Archive,...)

Reviewer 3: Same, I don't see how using the term "workload artifacts" makes the specification more clear as opposed to "components"

Author: As mentioned above, I agree. I am marking this conversation resolved, but leaving the above one open, because I think the discussion should be kept in a single place.

> They are managed and hosted separately:

Reviewer 3: It's not clear what "they" refers to here. Instead of "They" state explicitly what is "managed and hosted separately"

Author: Fixed.

> - application registries store application definitions and their associated application resources 

Reviewer 3: The specification currently indicates these are stored in a git repository. This may change in the future but I think for now we should explicitly state that here. And if we decide these no longer need to be stored in a Git repository we can update this text.

Author: That's correct, but that is a detail that IMO does not need to appear in this page. Conceptually it remains the same, no matter how it's implemented (Git or a web service): it is an application registry/catalog/store/... right?

I would rather add a note in parenthesis like "as of now a Git repository is mandated as application registry, but this might be subject to change in the future". That way we don't incur consistencies as quickly as we are doing now.

Reviewer 3: Fair point but this also means we are introducing a new term "application registry" that needs to be defined in our lexicon. 

The point I was attempting to get at is that while the purpose of your changes is to clarify what we mean by these concepts we're introducing even more new terms to do that. So the question is, does it make sense to introduce these new terms now and added to the lexicon? Or do we be more explicit right now and state plainly what it is and not introduce new terms?

Author: Introducing new terms might be good or bad depending on the purpose of the addition.

If these new terms are adding changes in the agreed status-quo, then I'd be against introducing them.

But if these new terms appear while trying to improve the documentation of the agreed status-quo, then I don't see an issue introducing them. In the end the misunderstandings on existing terms might appear due to gaps in the documentation and the new terms appear by filling-up the gaps.

My intention is only to do the latest.

Reviewer 3: Yeah, it makes sense as long as we're adding the terms to the lexicon and not only having them on this page.

Author: I fully agree.

My intention was (as long as we are still in "Draft" status) to keep all the proposal together in a single document. Once we agree on new terms or term modifications, I would update the lexicon accordingly before switching the PR to "Ready to merge".

Author: I have now updated also the lexicon.

> - workload artifact registries store workload artifacts

Reviewer 3: I think we should "OCI registries store..." because that's what it is. Using the term "workload artifact registries" makess it sound like this is something special but it's not.

Author: It is not that clear to me that components (AKA workload artifacts) are to be saved in an OCI registry. Perhaps it's clear for Helm deployments, but not so clear for Compose deployments. We are not requiring anybody to save the TARballs needed for a Compose deplyoment into an OCI registry.

That's the reason why I'm not explicitly saying "OCI registries".

Reviewer 3: Yeah, I guess that's true for the compose archive file. We haven't indicated how/where that is stored.

Same comment as above though, if we are going introduce a new term "workload artifacts registry" we need to define it in the lexicon.

Author: We agreed on using "component" instead of "workload artifact", right? So the right term would be "component registry". But in the end what I mean with "component registry" is what we have already defined as "[Workload Catalog](https://specification.margo.org/margo-overview/technical-lexicon/#workload-catalog)".

If we agree that we want to use "**component**" for the software at rest (I'll try to clarify better the difference between "component" and "workload" in the definitions), then I'd propose that:
1. We rename "Workload Catalog" into "Component Catalog" in the lexicon.
2. I replace all the "workload artifacts registry" or "component registry" instances in this document with "Component Catalog".

---

I've presented and provided arguments for the need that I see for a term different than "workload" for the software at rest that gets instantiated/deployed into a workload. It basically boils down to:
1. Workload sounds to me like runtime. Calling workload an archive sounds weird to me. Though I'm not a native speaker and might be my issue.
2. In the end the need for different terms for software artifacts and the result of instantiating/deploying those artifacts can be found in many different areas (container vs. container image, executable vs. process).

IMO we need to have a clear decision: how do we want to call the software artifacts resulting in workloads? Also workloads? Something else? Components? I'm not 100% we have a clear decision in that direction.

I've asked some AI following
> How important is it to have different terms for runnable software artifacts and the result of instantiating those artifacts?

This is the answer:
> The distinction between runnable software artifacts and the result of instantiating those artifacts is an important one in software engineering. A runnable software artifact, such as an executable program or a container image, is the packaged and deployable form of the software. It encapsulates the code, dependencies, and configuration required to run the application.
> 
> On the other hand, the result of instantiating a runnable artifact is the actual running instance of the software, such as a process or a container. This running instance is the concrete realization of the software artifact and is what ultimately interacts with the underlying system and provides the desired functionality.
> 
> The separation of these two concepts is important for several reasons:
> 
> - Deployment and Lifecycle Management: Treating runnable artifacts and running instances as distinct entities allows for more effective deployment, scaling, and lifecycle management of the software. Runnable artifacts can be versioned, tested, and promoted through different environments, while running instances can be monitored, scaled, and terminated independently.
> 
> - Reproducibility and Consistency: By focusing on the runnable artifact as the primary unit of deployment, it becomes easier to ensure that the software behaves consistently across different environments and that the same artifact can be deployed repeatedly, ensuring reproducibility.
> 
> - Security and Isolation: Treating running instances as separate from the runnable artifacts allows for better security and isolation, as the running instances can be more tightly controlled and monitored, while the artifacts can be managed and secured independently.
> 
> - Scalability and Elasticity: The distinction between runnable artifacts and running instances enables more flexible and scalable deployment models, where the number of running instances can be dynamically adjusted to meet changing demand, without the need to rebuild or redeploy the underlying artifacts.
> 
> In summary, the distinction between runnable software artifacts and the result of instantiating those artifacts is a fundamental concept in modern software engineering, as it enables more effective deployment, management, and scaling of software systems.

Reviewer 3: First, I'll address the "workload catalog" (formerly "application catalog") term. This is a case where changing it to "workload catalog" made the original intention unclear. I'm going to refer to it as an application catalog here.

This is a term I started using early on to differentiate a UI in the fleet manager that an end-user might use to select which application to deploy to their device from the Marketplace concept. Even though the Marketplace was out of scope it kept coming up and there was some confusion over this with something the fleet manager could show to the user. To make it possible to show this UI the fleet manager needed certain information (more on this later) about the application. This is when I started using the "application catalog" to ensure we are defining this information somewhere and it's not the same thing as the Marketplace. It was never supposed to mean anything other than a UI showing what application an end-user can install. If you watch the [demo recording](https://lists.margo.org/g/technical-wg/files/Margo%20Prototype%20Demo.mp4) I did a while back there are a couple of references to it at 3:45 and 13:00-14:50.

This was also visualized in some old diagrams we had done. For example: 
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6edea304-b953-40bb-a611-87b631bdd729)

If we look at our [Application Defintion](https://specification.margo.org/margo-api-reference/workload-api/application-package-api/application-description/#application-description-examples) the metadata section is where we put the information required to be able to render the application catalog UI. Nothing else in the application definition is needed. This has nothing to do with any of the components in the deployment profiles section.

Also, this application catalog concept was never meant to be a requirement in the specification. If the fleet manager provides some other means for deploying an application to a device where a user doesn't use the UI to select which application they want to deploy from the list of available applications then there isn't an application catalog. It's strictly a fleet manager implementation choice. It makes sense for usability and understanding potential workflow but that's about it.

Reviewer 3: >I've presented and provided arguments for the need that I see for a term different than "workload" for the software at rest that gets instantiated/deployed into a workload. It basically boils down to:
>
>1. Workload sounds to me like runtime. Calling workload an archive sounds weird to me. Though I'm not a native speaker and might be my issue.
> 2. In the end the need for different terms for software artifacts and the result of instantiating/deploying those artifacts can be found in many different areas (container vs. container image, executable vs. process).
>
> IMO we need to have a clear decision: how do we want to call the software artifacts resulting in workloads? Also workloads? Something else? Components? I'm not 100% we have a clear decision in that direction.

That's why I feel like we're overcomplicating things. I see three terms:

1. Application Package: This is the application definition and app catalog icon, license file, description file, etc. that are defined in the application definition metadata
2. Components: These are the helm charts, docker images, and compose tar files belonging to the application package as defined in the deployment profiles section.
3. Workloads: This is the running software. Workloads can be deployed (go from not existing to running), updated, and removed.

Reviewer 2: In the telco of 9th of April, we decided on the final terms in this context:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a5bb3f13-1fda-43a1-b127-14fd06bdc423)

I guess this can be resolved then. Right, @phil-abb ?

Author: Current formulation "Component Registries store components" should fit the naming we agreed upon in the call mentioned by Arne.

Reviewer 3: @arne-broering / @Silvanoc  At this point, I think you guys should go with what makes the most sense to you. As mentioned in Discord, my opinions may be skewed because I've been with the project since very early on.

Author: In the end it's only about fixing a common vocabulary. IMO the current document reflects the names we agreed upon on the call mentioned by Arne.

@phil-abb I interpret your comment like an approval to resolve this conversation. I won't close this conversation until tomorrow to give you a chance to correct me otherwise.

> ⁉️ _QUESTION_: what is an application catalog? are there workload artifact catalogs? what's that?

Reviewer 3: It's listed in the "Technical Lexicon" under the "Workload Fleet Manager" - The definition may need more details.

Author: There is a definition for ["Workload Catalog"](https://specification.margo.org/margo-overview/technical-lexicon/#workload-catalog), nothing for applications.

As I understand it, a workload catalog could hold Helm Charts, Compose TARballs,... but not Application Packages. Roughly speaking about my understanding:
- An Application Package (YAML + Resources) is made available over an "Application Catalog".
- A "Workload"/"Workload Artifact"/"Component" (a Helm Chart, a Compose TARball, a WASM module,...) is made available over a "Workload Catalog".

OCI Registries can be used for both Application and Workload Catalogs, but as long as we don't fix it in the specification, I'm talking of catalogs in general.

Reviewer 3: The "workload catalog" formerly "application catalog" is just a fancy name for a UI an end-user can see to select application/workloads to deploy on their devices.

Author: IMO Margo applications and Workloads/Components are two completely different things. Therefore I see the potential need for two completely different catalogs.

As I see it, workloads/components are defined by the providers. Some of them 100%-externally-defined (like Helm Charts) and some others partially Margo-defined (like the "Compose" archives).

---

Thinking about it, I'm wondering if it would not make sense to consider the specification of the workloads something external to the Margo "Core" specification. We could have something like "Margo provider" specifications.  That way we can say that the Helm Chart provider specifies its workload format in the Helm specification and the "Compose" archive specification would become a "Margo provider" specification.

Providers would need to fulfill certain requirements:
1. they specify a distribution mechanism
2. they specify a way to accompany the workload with certain additional resources (like icons, documents,...)
3. ...

We could say that Helm Chart is a provider that fulfills the requirements out-of-the-box, so Margo can simply support this provider without further additions.

On the other hand "Compose" does not fulfill neither 1., nor 2. So Margo could have a separate area for "Providers" where Margo needs a thin adaption layer. I would then move [what we have in the specification regarding the "Compose" provider](https://specification.margo.org/app-interoperability/application-package-definition/) to that "Providers" area in a repository providing the "Compose Provider specification". Here the opinion of @arne-broering is probably required.

Reviewer 3: >IMO Margo applications and Workloads/Components are two completely different things. Therefore I see the potential need for two completely different catalogs.

I addressed this in the previous comment and this doesn't align with why I started using the term "application catalog"

> Thinking about it, I'm wondering if it would not make sense to consider the specification of the workloads something external to the Margo "Core" specification.

I think we're overthinking this and making all of this more difficult to understand by trying to be so nuanced with these concepts.

Reviewer 2: We decided in the telco on 9th of April following wording and relations:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/56a4f217-8616-401f-858e-db3dced15975)

Reviewer 2: I guess this can also be resolved now, right, @phil-abb ?

Author: Fix: test removed

> Following diagram shows the mentioned registries and resources (container images not being shown for simplicity):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following diagram shows the mentioned registries and resources (container images are not shown for simplicity):
```

```mermaid
C4Component
    title Application Bundling: applications-workload definitions relationship

>     System_Boundary(ar, "Application Registry") {

Reviewer 3: I would suggest "Git Repository"

Author: I am questioning the convenience of forcing applications to be published on a git repository. But you are right, that this is not the right place to do so. As long as we have a git repository as "application registry", I should reflect that wording in this document.

I'll change it. According what I wrote in another comment, using "application registry" but stating that they are as of now meant to be git repositories.

[EDIT]: I just found [here](https://specification.margo.org/app-interoperability/workload-orch-to-app-reg-interaction/) following sentence:
> The Application Developer SHALL use a [Git repository](https://git-scm.com/) to share an [application package](https://specification.margo.org/app-interoperability/application-package-definition/). This Git repository is considered the **Application Registry**.

So I will use the term "application registry" with the remark that as of now application registries SHALL be git repositories.

Reviewer 3: I created [this work item](https://github.com/margo/specification/issues/82) yesterday about specifying Git. I don't think we need to get into this for preview release 1 but I agree we should revisit this.

I'll comment on the "application catalog" a little later. I'm the one who started using the term and it's taking on a life of its own that is not what I intended when I started using it. So I guess this is a good example why doing things like this is important 😄

Author: I have now all over the place "Application Registry" adding a remark that it's meant to be Git. With that it should be okayish...

>         Container_Boundary(ab2, "Application Package 2") {

Reviewer 3: I would change the number in the chart so 1 is top left and 4 is bottom right.

Author: Fixed

>         Container_Boundary(ab2, "Application Package 2") {

Reviewer 3: We should probably put a note below the diagram explaining what "container" means in the context so people don't accidentally think it's an actually OCI container.

Author: Fixed. I've used "System_Boundary" overall instead of using "Container_Boundary", which might be misleading in our context.

            Component(atb2, "Application Description 2", "ApplicationDescription", "YAML document")
            Component(o2, "...", "Others")
        }

        Container_Boundary(ab1, "Application Package 1") {
            Component(atb1, "Application Description 1", "ApplicationDescription", "YAML document")
            Component(o1, "...", "Others")
        }
        
        Container_Boundary(ab4, "Application Package 4") {
            Component(atb4, "Application Description 4", "ApplicationDescription", "YAML document")
            Component(o4, "...", "Others")
        }

        Container_Boundary(ab3, "Application Package 3") {
            Component(atb3, "Application Description 3", "ApplicationDescription", "YAML document")
            Component(o3, "...", "Others")
        }
    }

>     System_Boundary(crr, "Workload Artifact Registry") {

Reviewer 3: I would suggest "OCI Registry"

Author: As mentioned above, we are not requiring OCI registries to be used as "Workload Catalog". It makes sense for Helm Charts, but it is not so obvious for Compose TARballs.

Reviewer 3: See previous comments about this.

Author: Fix: renamed to "Component Registry"

        Component(hc1, "Helm Chart 1", "Workload Artifact")
        Component(hc2, "Helm Chart 2", "Workload Artifact")
        Component(hc3, "Helm Chart 3", "Workload Artifact")
        Component(cc1, "Compose Archive 1", "Workload Artifact", "TARball")
        Component(cc2, "Compose Archive 2", "Workload Artifact", "TARball")
    }

>     Rel(atb1, hc1, "refers")

Reviewer 3: Maybe remove this one because there are too many application descriptions pointing to the same helm charts and it might be confusing.

Author: Fine for me I'll remove it.

    Rel(atb1, hc2, "refers")
    Rel(atb1, cc1, "refers")

    Rel(atb2, hc1, "refers")
    Rel(atb1, hc3, "refers")

    Rel(atb3, hc3, "refers")
    Rel(atb3, cc1, "refers")

    Rel(atb4, cc2, "refers")

    UpdateElementStyle(atb1, $fontColor="white", $bgColor="blue", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(atb2, $fontColor="white", $bgColor="blue", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(atb3, $fontColor="white", $bgColor="blue", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(atb4, $fontColor="white", $bgColor="blue", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(hc1, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="khaki", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(hc2, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="khaki", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(hc3, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="khaki", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(cc1, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="lightsalmon", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(cc2, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="lightsalmon", $borderColor="grey")
```

> Following diagram shows the relationship between the different resources of an application bundle and their relationship with the required workload artifacts for a sample application provide Helm v3 and Compose deployment profiles:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following diagram shows the relationship between the different resources of an application bundle and the required workload artifacts for an example application providing both Helm v3 and Compose deployment profiles:
```

```mermaid
C4Component

>     title Application Bundling: Example 1 - Helm and Compose workload profiles provided

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    title Application Bundling: Example 1 - Helm and Compose deployment profiles provided
```

    System_Boundary(ar, "Application Registry") {
        Container_Boundary(ab1, "Application Package 1") {

>             Component(atb1, "Application Package", "Reference", "Git reference? OCI manifest?")

Reviewer 3: The specification currently indicates this is hosted in a Git repository so that's what we should indicate here. If the community decides to change this in the specification later we can update it here.

Author: The here is what is the way to refer to an application package. Is it a URL or a git repository + tag or commit? Is it rather like in Go somehow derived from the above mentioned URLs? Is it like in Python PIP? Is it like in containers? So even if we stick to git repositories to host the application packages, we have multiple different ways to "name" those application packages.

Reviewer 3: Unfortunately, I'm not following what you mean with this last comment.

Author: Fix: artifact type reference removed. As mentioned in another conversation, we need to refine how we "name" or "refer" to the application packages.

                Container_Boundary(c2, "deploymentProfiles") {
                    Container_Boundary(c3, "helm.v3") {
                        Component(wldh1, "Helm WorkloadArtifact 1", "Section in YAML document")
                    }
                    Container_Boundary(c4, "compose") {
                        Component(wldc1, "Compose WorkloadArtifact 1", "Section in YAML document")
                    }
                }
                Rel(ad,wldh1, "defines")
                Rel(ad,wldc1, "defines")
            }

            Rel(atb1, ad, "requires")
            Rel(atb1, rd, "requires")
        }
    }

    System_Boundary(crr, "Workload Artifact Registry") {
        Component(hc1, "Helm Chart 1", "Workload Artifact")
        Component(cc1, "Compose Archive 1", "Workload Artifact", "TARball")
    }

    Rel(wldh1, hc1, "refers")
    Rel(wldc1, cc1, "refers")

    UpdateElementStyle(ad, $fontColor="white", $bgColor="blue", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(hc1, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="khaki", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(cc1, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="lightsalmon", $borderColor="grey")
```

> Following diagram shows the top-level structure of a Compose workload artifact:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following diagram shows the top-level structure of a Compose workload artifact:
```

    title Application Bundling: Example 2 - focus on Worload Definition registry

    UpdateLayoutConfig($c4BoundaryInRow="1", $c4ShapeInRow="3")

    System_Boundary(ar, "Application Registry") {
        Container_Boundary(ab1, "Application Package 1") {
            Component(atb1, "Application Package", "Git reference? OCI manifest?")

            Container_Boundary(c1, "Application Description") {
                Component(ad, "Application Description", "YAML document")
                Container_Boundary(c2, "deploymentProfiles") {
                    Container_Boundary(c4, "compose") {
                        Component(wldc1, "Compose WorkloadArtifact 1")
                    }
                }
                Rel(ad,wldc1, "defines")
            }

            Component(rd, "Resources", "Directory")

            Rel(atb1, ad, "requires")
            Rel(atb1, rd, "requires")
        }
    }

    System_Boundary(crr, "Workload Artifact Registry") {
        Component(cc1, "Compose Configuration 1", "Compose")
        Component(ca1, "Compose Archive 1", "Workload Artifact", "TARball")
        Rel(ca1, cc1, "contains")
        UpdateRelStyle(cc1, cim1, $offsetY="50")
    }

>     System_Boundary(cir, "Container Image Registry") {

Reviewer 3: The fact this one shows the container image registry and the other one above doesn't maybe confusing. If we're going to put it here we should put it in the one above.

Author: That's because the focus of the diagram is on the top level and this diagram is focused on the level below. The title of the diagram is saying where the focus is. I realize now though, that I need to rename all the "Component Registry", "Workload Artifact Registry" and similar into "Component Catalog".

Author: @phil-abb please resolve this conversation if fixing it is not important enough to block this PR. Removing it later is as easy as creating a PR after merging.

        Component(cim1, "Container Image 1", "Archive")
    }

    Rel(wldc1, ca1, "refers")
    Rel(cc1, cim1, "refers")

    UpdateElementStyle(ad, $fontColor="white", $bgColor="blue", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(ca1, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="lightsalmon", $borderColor="grey")
```

> Both an application as well as the contained components are typically configurable, but can though provide some default values.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The application and contained components are typically configurable with the option of providing default values.
```

### 2. Software Staging

> ⁉️ _QUESTION_: what is the connection between `ApplicationDescription` and `ApplicationDeployment`?

Reviewer 3: The information is documented [here](https://specification.margo.org/margo-api-reference/workload-api/desired-state-api/desired-state/)

There are multiple places in the description where it indicates the value comes from the application definition which is how they are associated.

Author: I saw it! You mean the [Annotation](https://specification.margo.org/margo-api-reference/workload-api/desired-state-api/desired-state/#annotations-attributes) `applicationId`, right? I read there
> The applicationId MUST match the associated application package Metadata "id" attribute.

Reviewer 3: That's one but after reading through it again I agree we should improve the descriptions of the deploymentProfile and parameters sections because the deploymentProfile should match the selected deploymentProfile in the Application Definition and the parameters should match the parameters section with the value resolved.

Author: Trying to model this relationship graphically I'm having difficulties understanding the relationship between "Application Definitions" and "Application Deployments". 

For example, it looks to me as if both were declaring the needed components (AKA workload artifacts). But what do you need an "Application Definition" to be able to package the application, if the "Application Deployment" is declaring it itself anyway?

I might be missing something...

Author: @arne-broering what is the point anyway on having "Application Packages" if they are not meant to be used for software distribution to the devices? I don't fully get the point. It might be only the name misleading me...

Reviewer 3: >Trying to model this relationship graphically I'm having difficulties understanding the relationship between "Application Definitions" and "Application Deployments".

The application package is for the fleet manager to use and the application deployment is for the device to use. The application deployment is a scaled-down version of the application definition containing only the information the device needs to know about. There is a lot of information in the application definition the device doesn't need to know.

The application package with application definition has several things in it that are only needed by the fleet manager. For example:
- Most of the metadata section - This is needed to build the application catalog UI (see [previous comment](https://github.com/margo/specification/pull/81#discussion_r2025122516) about my original meaning of this term)
- Which types of deployment profiles are supported - So the fleet manager knows what types of devices can be targeted
- The configuration and schema section - So the fleet manager can present a UI to the end-user where they can fill in the required parameter values.

The application deployment only contains the information the device requires to deploy all the components. So this means:
- The list of components for the specific deployment profile the device supports - right now this is just a copy of the application definition's specific deployment profile matching the device's type but this will change eventually and there will be more information in the application definition's deployment profile than the device needs to know about.
- The resolved parameter values and pointers so it can configure the values when installing - the only information the device cares about is the parameter's value and the pointer to where the value needs to be set in either the values.yaml or the compose configuration file.

Author: Fixed.

> ℹ️ _NOTE_: stage completely out of scope as of now.

Reviewer 3: I agree with this and would suggest you move all the "staging" content concepts to an issue for the community to consider and remove it from this document. As mentioned above there are a lot of implications with this "staging" concept that complicates things.

Author: Fixed: "Staging" stage removed from the document.

> ⁉️ _QUESTION_: How to get an application staged, but not deployed?

Reviewer 3: This is one of my questions. I've heard people say they want to be able to "start" and "stop" applications. I have no clue how you would even do this with Kubernetes but I'm not an expert.

Author: I don't know either what they mean with "start" and "stop". But "staged" the stage before even having started an application once.

I mention how you can stage an application (according my definition) in [this comment](https://github.com/margo/specification/pull/81/files#r2009696394).

Author: Fixed: "Staging" stage removed from the document.

```mermaid
C4Context
    title Software Staging stage

    UpdateLayoutConfig($c4BoundaryInRow="1", $c4ShapeInRow="2")

    Enterprise_Boundary(be, "Backend") {
        System(apdb, "ApplicationDeployment", "Application Deployment specification")
        System(appb, "ApplicationDescription", "Application Package")
    }

    Enterprise_Boundary(dev, "Device") {
        System(apdd, "ApplicationDeployment", "Application Deployment specification")
        System(wls, "Workload Artifacts")

>         System(appd, "ApplicationDescription", "Application Package")

Reviewer 3: The application description is never sent to the device. It's only the application deployment.

Author: _[EDIT]:_ striking through erroneous comment.

~~This diagram is not considering the devices at all, because it's focusing on the "workload artifacts"/components. The focus is only on the packaging of an application (even if it's a composite/distributed/aggregated package).~~

I was nevertheless unaware, that devices don't get to see application packages.

Reviewer 3: I'm confused then because it has `Enterprise_Boundary(dev, "Device") {` so to me this indicates what gets sent to the device.

Author: My bad! With all the changes in between I lost the reference and thought that you were referring to the previous diagram! You are right that this diagram is considering the device and then your comment fully applies.

Author: Fixed.

In this stage the [providers](https://specification.margo.org/margo-overview/technical-lexicon/#provider-model) are responsible for managing the workload artifacts.

On a Helm v3 deployment profile, the Workload Fleet Management Agent will instruct the Helm API to install the specified Helm Charts.

On a Compose deployment profile, the Workload Fleet Management Agent will instruct the corresponding middleware (remember that Compose workload artifacts are archives containing Compose configurations and other resources) to install the workload artifact.

Following diagram shows the result of staging an application and the corresponding workload artifacts on a Helm v3 deployment profile (the result of `helm pull`).

```mermaid

> C4Component

Reviewer 3: We probably would want to include the parameters in this diagram

Author: Which parameters do you mean? Do you mean the [parameters specified in an Application Description](https://specification.margo.org/margo-api-reference/workload-api/application-package-api/application-description/#defining-configurable-application-parameters)? What for?

Reviewer 2: Is this by now clarified? @phil-abb

Reviewer 3: @Silvanoc / @arne-broering  With the changes, the original comment can go away, but there are issues with the last two diagrams. The "Application Description" never gets sent to the device. It's only the "Application Deployment"

The application description never leaves the WFM

Author: You're right! I'll open a conversation in the right place as a reminder to fix it and close this one.

    title Application Staging: Helm v3 deployment profile

    UpdateLayoutConfig($c4BoundaryInRow="3", $c4ShapeInRow="1")

    System_Boundary(dev1, "Device 1") {
        System_Boundary(woa1, "Workload Fleet Management Agent") {
            Component(atb1, "ApplicationDeployment 1", "ApplicationDeployment", "YAML document")
        }

        System_Boundary(hel1, "Helm") {
            Component(hc1, "Helm Chart File 1", "YAML file")
            Component(hc2, "Helm Chart File 2", "YAML file")
        }

        System_Boundary(fs1, "File System") {

>             System_Boundary(doc1, "Docker Engine") {

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure if using "Docker" here is appropriate - is there a more generic term we can use that isn't Docker specific?

Author: It was only meant to be an example. I personally prefer to use "Container Engine" over "Docker Engine", but I thought it would puzzle people more. Happy to rename it to "Container Engine" 😄

Author: Fixed: done.

                Component(cim1, "Container Image 1")
                Component(cim2, "Container Image 2")
                Component(cim3, "Container Image 3")
            }
        }
    }

    Rel(atb1, hc1, "refers")
    Rel(hc1, cim1, "refers")
    Rel(atb1, hc2, "refers")
    Rel(hc2, cim1, "refers")
    Rel(hc2, cim2, "refers")
    Rel(hc2, cim3, "refers")

    UpdateElementStyle(atb1, $fontColor="white", $bgColor="blue", $borderColor="grey")
```

> Following diagram shows the result of staging an application and the corresponding workload artifacts on a Compose deployment profile (the result of `compose pull`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following diagram shows the result of staging an application and the corresponding workload artifacts on a Compose deployment profile (the result of `compose pull`).
```

```mermaid
C4Component

>     title Application Staging: Compose deployment profile

Reviewer 3: same comment about parameters in this diagram as well.

Author: Fix: code removed.

    UpdateLayoutConfig($c4BoundaryInRow="3", $c4ShapeInRow="1")

    System_Boundary(dev1, "Device 1") {
        System_Boundary(woa1, "Workload Fleet Management Agent") {
            Component(atb1, "ApplicationDeployment 1", "ApplicationDeployment", "YAML document")
        }

>         System_Boundary(fs1, "File System") {

Reviewer 3: Did we want to show the tar ball file in the diagram? Not sure if it matters too much.

Author: Fix: no more references to the TARballs.

            Component(cc1, "Compose Configuration 1")
            Component(cc2, "Compose Configuration 2")
            System_Boundary(doc1, "Docker Engine") {
                Component(cim1, "Container Image 1")
                Component(cim2, "Container Image 2")
                Component(cim3, "Container Image 3")
            }
        }
    }

    Rel(atb1, cc1, "refers")
    Rel(atb1, cc2, "refers")
    Rel(cc1, cim1, "refers")
    Rel(cc2, cim2, "refers")
    Rel(cc2, cim3, "refers")

    UpdateElementStyle(atb1, $fontColor="white", $bgColor="green", $borderColor="grey")
```

### 3. Software Deployment

```mermaid
C4Context
    title Software Deployment stage

    UpdateLayoutConfig($c4BoundaryInRow="1", $c4ShapeInRow="2")

    Enterprise_Boundary(be, "Backend") {
        System(apdb, "ApplicationDeployment", "Application Deployment specification")
        System(appb, "ApplicationDescription", "Application Package")
    }

    Enterprise_Boundary(dev, "Device") {
        System(apdd, "ApplicationDeployment", "Application Deployment specification")
        System(wls, "Workload")

>         System(appd, "ApplicationDescription", "Application Package")

Reviewer 3: Same here, Application Description is never sent to the device

Author: Got it, will fix it!

        Rel(apdd, wls, "configures")
    }

    BiRel(apdb, apdd, "same")
    BiRel(appb, appd, "same")
    UpdateElementStyle(appb, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="blue", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(appd, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="blue", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(apdb, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="green", $borderColor="grey")
    UpdateElementStyle(apdd, $fontColor="black", $bgColor="green", $borderColor="grey")
```

When a device gets the instruction to run an application (over a desired-state specified with an [`ApplicationDeployment` object](https://specification.margo.org/margo-api-reference/workload-api/desired-state-api/desired-state/?h=applicationdeployment#applicationdeployment-definition)), its Workload Fleet Management Agent interacts with the [providers](https://specification.margo.org/margo-overview/technical-lexicon/#provider-model).
That way all workloads needed for an application should get started and the desired state should be reached.

In this stage the [providers](https://specification.margo.org/margo-overview/technical-lexicon/#provider-model) are responsible for managing the individual workloads.

> On a Helm v3 deployment profile, the Workload Fleet Management Agent will instruct the Helm API to start the individual Helm Charts.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure if we should be saying this here. This is an implementation detail. The way a device supplier implements this is up to them.

Author: I would like to give this specification some "roots" into existing tools and technologies. Therefore I was trying to show how Margo interfaces with the underlying, external components. What about rewording it to something like:

"On a Helm v3 deployment profile, the Workload Fleet Management Agent _would probably_ instruct the Helm API to start the individual Helm Charts."

Reviewer 3: Yeah, if we reword it to be more of an example of how it might work instead of an emphatic statement about how it works then I'm fine with it.

> On a Compose deployment profile, the Workload Fleet Management Agent will instruct the Compose CLI to start the individual workloads.

Reviewer 3: Same comment here

Author: I would like to give this specification some "roots" into existing tools and technologies. Therefore I was trying to show how Margo interfaces with the underlying, external components. What about rewording it into something like:

"On a Compose deployment profile, the Workload Fleet Management Agent _would probably_ instruct the Compose CLI to start the individual workloads."

Reviewer 3: same as above

> Following diagram shows the result of reaching the desired state for an application on a Helm v3 deployment profile (the result of `helm install`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following diagram shows the result of reaching the desired state for an application with a Helm v3 deployment profile (the result of `helm install`).
```

```mermaid
C4Component
    title Application Deployment: Helm v3 deployment profile

    UpdateLayoutConfig($c4BoundaryInRow="3", $c4ShapeInRow="1")

    System_Boundary(dev1, "Device 1") {
        System_Boundary(woa1, "Workload Fleet Management Agent") {
            Component(atb1, "Application Description 1", "ApplicationDescription", "YAML document")
        }

        System_Boundary(hel1, "Helm") {
            Component(hc1, "Helm Chart 1")
            Component(hc2, "Helm Chart 2")
        }

        System_Boundary(kbl1, "Kubelet") {
            Component(pod1, "Pod 1")
            Component(pod2, "Pod 2")
            Component(pod3, "Pod 3")
        }
    }

    Rel(atb1, hc1, "refers")
    Rel(hc1, pod1, "refers")
    Rel(atb1, hc2, "refers")
    Rel(hc2, pod2, "refers")
    Rel(hc2, pod3, "refers")
    Rel(hc2, pod3, "refers")

    UpdateElementStyle(atb1, $fontColor="white", $bgColor="blue", $borderColor="grey")
```

> Following diagram shows the result of deploying an application and the corresponding workload artifacts on a Compose deployment profile (the result of `compose up`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following diagram shows the result of deploying an application and the corresponding workload artifacts with a Compose deployment profile (the result of `compose up`).
```
